# Differential Gene Expression Analysis of Old Versus Young Adipose Tissue
This is code written in Python and run in Jupyter notebook. Its aim is to display the outputs of differential gene expression analysis from DESeq2. It is applied to a dataset generated by Trim et al. (2021) which measured the differences in adipose tissue gene expression between young and old people.


## Description
Trim et al. (2021) sequenced the transcriptome of adipose tissue samples from twelve young and twelve old people to identify changes in adipose tissue gene expression with ageing. The raw RNA sequencing data was analysed using DeSeq2. The output was a csv file with over 35,000 genes, along with log2 fold change (Log2FC) value, the p-values and adjusted p-values. The Log2FC of a gene describes the ratio between the average level of gene expression in the old compared with the young group. 

The aims of this code were to interpret and present the results of this analysis. In particular, the objectives were to write code in Python to:

- Calculate the number of up and downregulated genes between old and young groups
- Identify the single most up- and down-regulated genes
- Identify and display the top ten up- and down-regulated genes in old compared to young
- Produce a volcano plot to show the overall differential gene expression profile


## Getting Started

### To run:

1. Download the Python script 'DGE_analysis_coursework.ipynb' in this repository along with the 'adipose_tissue_DGE_results_Trim.csv' csv file.

2. Run the script in Jupyter Notebook.


### Supporting notes:

- The core modules are at the top of the script.
- To determine if a gene is up or downregulated, Log2FC thresholds of 0.5 or -0.5 are used, respectively. Statistical significance is determined by p < 0.05. These parameters could be adjusted in the code to allow different thresholds if necessary.
- In this analysis, all gene types are included, both protein-coding and non-protein-coding. A filter could be added to select only for protein-coding genes if necessary.

## Authors
The code was written by @annapnicholas.

## Acknowledgements
Many thanks to Matt Williams and Chrys Woods for teaching Python and GitHub as part of the Data Science and Machine Learning Module of SWBio DTP.

Many thanks to Trim et al. for generating the dataset in use.

## References
Trim, William V., Jean‐Philippe Walhin, Françoise Koumanov, Anne Bouloumié, Mark A. Lindsay, Yung‐Chih Chen, Rebecca L. Travers, James E. Turner, and Dylan Thompson. 2021. 'Divergent immunometabolic changes in adipose tissue and skeletal muscle with ageing in healthy humans', The Journal of Physiology.






